This lecture is about
creating new variables.
Once you loaded the data set into R,
sometimes you'll find that some of
the variables that you're looking for
are not actually in the raw
data that you loaded in.
So, you may need to transform the data
a little bit to get the value you'd like.
Usually, you'll add those values
back into the data frame.
This is particularly important when
you're doing something like prediction,
where you wanna create new variables but
you might use as predictors.
Common variables that people
create are missingness indicators.
So, pointing out where you
might have missing data,
that's one really common
variable to create.
Also cutting up quantitative variables,
creating variables that are factor
versions of a quantitative variable
corresponding to particular
values that may be of interest.
Or applying transformations to deal with
data that have a strange distributions.
So, we're gonna be using this Baltimore
restaurant data set as an example.
So again, you could go to their URL and
then click over here on this export button
to get the URL for
a particular version of the data set.
In this case, I'm using the CSV version.
Again, I see if the data directory exists.
Then I download the file
from the internet,
and I load it into R using read.csv.
Now, I've got a data set rest data which
is the restaurant data that was created
from this data set.
And so, one thing that I'm gonna
talk about first before I get into
analyzing a data set
is creating sequences.
Sequences are often used to index
different operations that you're going to
be doing on data, and so it's good to
be able to know how to create them.
The command that you use in R is seq.
And so, usually what you do is you
tell seq the minimum value and
the maximum value.
And then there's two ways in which you
usually specify how many values to
generate.
One is to use the by command, so
by=2 means it starts at 1 and
then creates new values,
increasing each new value by 2.
Another way to do it is to
specify the length of the vector.
And so what that means is,
it'll start at 1 and
end at 10, and
it will create exactly three values.
A third way is to say, suppose you have
a vector x and it has five values in it.
And suppose you wanna create an index, so
that you can loop over those five values.
You might use this seq(along = x),
which will basically create a vector
of the same length as x, but with
consecutive indices that you can use for
looping or accessing subsets of data sets.
So, one kind of variable that you might
wanna create is a variable that indicates
which subset another variable comes from.
So for example,
here we have these restaurant data.
We actually have the neighborhoods
that the restaurants are in.
And so, I might wanna find all the
restaurants that are in two neighborhoods
near me, Roland Park and Homeland.
And so, if I use this percent in percent
command, it will allow me to find
only the restaurants that
are in those two neighborhoods.
It will return true if you're in that
neighborhood and false if you're not.
And then what I'm doing is,
I'm appending these nearMe variable
onto the restaurant data set.
So, this allows me to now subset that data
set only by the restaurants that are near
me, which is kind of a nice,
clean way of subsetting the data set,
as opposed to always having to use this
longer percent, ampersand command.
Another thing you might wanna
do is create binary variables.
So for example, we might wanna find the
cases where we know the zip code is wrong.
So again, I'm assigning to the data
frame the variable zipWrong.
And here I'm using the ifelse command.
So for the ifelse command,
I first send it a condition.
In this case, I'm gonna send it the
condition is the zip code less than zero?
So if the zip code is less than zero, we
think that that is zip code must be wrong.
And so, the first thing that I return
is true if the condition holds true.
So in other words, all the cases
where the zip code is less than zero,
I'll get a true.
And then, this is what the function
returns if the condition is false.
So if the condition is false, in other
words if the zip code is positive,
then I get a false.
So at the end of the day, what I can do is
then make a table of whether the zip code
is wrong and
what if the zip code is less than zero.
And you can see that in all the cases
where the zip code are greater than zero,
I get false.
And in the one case where the zip
code is less than zero, I get true.
And so that might be a value that
I wanna filter out of my data set.
This makes an easy way to
filter those values out.
You also might wanna make categorical
variables out of quantitative variables.
So for example, we might wanna break
the zip codes up into consecutive numbers.
So here, I'm gonna create a variable
that I'm calling zipGroups.
And so,
what I'm gonna use is this cut command.
Gonna apply it to quantitative
variable to zipCode.
And I'm gonna tell the cut command that I
want to break that up according to some
values, a list of value that I give it.
In this case,
I'm gonna break it up according to
the quintiles to that zip code.
So, what that will then
return as a factor variables.
So zip groups, is a factor variable
where we'll break the variable
zip code up into the zero
quantums of the 25th percentile,
the 25th, so the fiftieth percentile.
The 50th, the 75th, and
the 75th to the 100th percentile.
And so for example,
there are about 375 of the values that
land between the 25th percentile and
the 50th percentile.
So, then what i can do is i can make
a table that shows you which of the zip
codes fall into which of
these different clusters.
And so you can say, the low values
fall into the first cluster and
then the medium values fall into
the next cluster, and so forth.
So, what this does is it breaks the
quantity of variable up into a categorical
variable.
An easier way to that,
I had to specify all the breaks
with the quantile function in
the previous version of cut.
If you go into the Hmisc package and
you use the cut2 function, you can
actually specify I want to break the zip
code up into four different groups and
I want to break them up
according to the quantiles.
And so when I do that, it will actually
find out the quantiles for me and
break it up into four groups according to
the quantiles, which is kind of a nice
way to do it if you don't wanna
have to set the breaks in advance.
So, the cut2 function
in the Hmisc package.
Another thing you might wanna do is you
might wanna create factor variables.
So for example, the zip code
variable is an Attinger variable
when you load it into r, but you might
wanna turn it into a factor variable.
In other words, it's not clear
that incrementing the zip code by one
changes quantitatively, the variable.
So, you might wanna turn that
into a factor variable and
the way you do that is
with the factor command.
So, it takes an input of
this integer variable, and
it turns it into a factor
variable which I'm calling ZCF.
So, if I look at the first ten values
of ZCF, it shows me these values and
they look just like they did before.
They look like the values that are the but
then it tells me how many different
zip code levels there are.
There are 32 different zip code levels,
and
if I look at a class of this
variable it's a factor variable.
So, a couple of other things that you
might wanna know about factor variables.
So here, what I'm gonna do is I'm going
to create just a dummy vector, so
that we can see some other
properties of factor Variables.
I'm gonna create a vector of yeses and
nos, and so I'm gonna do that randomly.
I'm gonna generate a size
ten vector of yeses and nos.
And I'm gonna turn that
into a factor variable.
And I'm gonna, by default, what it's gonna
do is it's gonna treat the lowest value
alphabetically as the first value,
the factor variable.
But supposed I wanna treat the second,
the yes values as the lowest value.
Then I can tell it to take the levels and
create them in this order.
And so for example, what I can do
is I can re-level that variable and
make the reference plus be
equal to the yes value.
Another thing that you can do is
you can use the as.numeric command
to to change that factor variable
back into a numeric variable.
If you wanna use it in certain kinds of
models, this can be a useful thing to do.
And one thing that it'll do is, it'll
start with sort of the lowest value and
call that one and then the next lowest
value and call that two and so forth.
So, cutting produces factor variables.
We saw before that I wanted to
create this zipGroups variable,
where I cut the zipCodes up into four
separate groups by their quantiles.
And so, if you make a table of them,
you'll get to see this table and
the class of this object zip
groups is now a factor variable.
You can actually use the mutate
function to create a new
version of the variable and
simultaneously added to a data set.
This is part of the flyer package.
So, what I'm gonna do here is I'm
gonna create a new data frame.
This new data frame is, I'm gonna apply
the mutate function to the old data frame.
And I'm going to add a new variable
zipGroups, which is equal to a function of
one of the variables in
the original rest data data frame.
And so, what happens now is
the new data frame will be
the old data frame rest data
with the new variables added.
So now,
I can make a table of the zipGroups and
I can see that it appears in
this new data frame rest suite.
Another thing that you're probably gonna
do with quantitive data is explore to
analysis, maybe apply some
different transformations.
So, here is the list of the most common
transformations taking absolute values at
square roots.
You might take the ceiling on the floor,
if you wanna run values up or
down to the nearest integer.
You can also use the round function to
round to as many digits as you'd like, or
the signif function, to round to as
many significant digits as you'd like.
All the standards for calculator
functions, like cosine and sine, and in r.
As well as logs, which are commonly
used when you have skewed data, or
data with a lot of outliers.
And then you can also exponentiate data,
as well.
There's a lot more about this, at these
two links that I'd provided you here at
the bottom, and you can have these lecture
notes, as well as this stat methods page.
Even more further notes are available
from the plyr tutorial,
as well as the lecture notes that focus on
transformation from Andy Jaffe as well.